
## data 
- Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)

## resources

- Topics of SOEP-Core » Health and Care
  - http://companion.soep.de/Topics%20of%20SOEPcore/Health%20and%20Care.html?highlight=health
  
## Papers 

### Deaton 2003: Health, Inequality, and Economic Development 

Journal of Economic Literature Vol. XLI March 2003 - pp. 113–158

#### outline 

2. Theoretical Accounts of Income Inequality and Health

Section 2 lays out some of the possible stories, starting with the simple case
in which health is affected by income, and there is no direct effect of
inequality. This is sometimes referred to us the “absolute income hypothesis,”

#### paper topics 

- inequality -> health (poor and rich countries)
- "absolute income hypothesis" -> income/wealth inequality has no (direct)
  effect on health outcomes 
- third factor := education 
- or "irrationality" (discount rate -> failure to protect health and build capital)
- behavioural risk data -> health (--> whitehall studies)
- **Wilkinson’s idea** that income is important at low levels of income, and income
  inequality at high levels of income, which, as we have seen, is also
  consistent with a nonlinear effect of income and no direct influence of in-
  equality


#### ideais while reading

- check in SOEP if relationship is concave

#### cites 

- Wilkinson, Richard. 2000. Mind the Gap: Hierarchies, Health, and Human
  Evolution. London: Weidenfeld and Nicol- son.

- Kunst, Anton; Feikje Groenhof, Johan P Mackenbach and EU Working Group on
  Socioeconomic Inequalities in Health. 1998. “Occupational Class and Cause
  Specific Mortality in Middle Aged Men in 11 European Countries: Comparison of
  Population Based Studies,” Brit. Med. J. 316, pp. 1636–42.
  
  -> show that in both public / private systems relationship income * ineq
  exists

"Although figure 2 shows no poverty line below which income matters and above
which it does not, it is at the bottom of the income distribution that the
relationship" (Deaton 2003:50)

- Miller, Douglas. 2000. “Income Inequality and Mortality in the US: Aggregate
  Data and Micro Relationships,” Princeton U. econ. dept., Ph.D. thesis, ch. 1.
  -> leaves no room for income inequality

- Wolfson, Michael C.; George A. Kaplan, John W. Lynch, Nancy A. Ross and Eric
  Backlund. 1999. “Relationship between Income Inequality and Mortality:
  Empirical Demonstration,” Brit. Med. J. 319, pp. 953–55.

- Judge, Ken; Jo-Ann Mulligan and Michaela Benzeval. 1997. “Income Inequality
  and Population Health,”Soc. Sci. Med. 46, pp. 567–79.
  -> "The single most convincing study of the LIS countries is by Judge, Jo-Ann
  Mulligan, and Benzeval (1997)"

#### extraction of zotero 

Extracted Annotations (16/03/2021, 23:49:07)

"But as we shall see, many of the arguments that income inequality is a health
risk are as plausible for poor as for rich countries and, in some cases, more
so." (Deaton 2003:47)

"This is sometimes referred to us the "absolute income hypothesis," to emphasize
that it is income that matters for health, not income relative to other peoples'
incomes, nor income inequality." (Deaton 2003:47)

"For much of this paper, I shall take it as given that a causal link from income
to health is at least part of the story, and follow the consequences" (Deaton
2003:47)

"Much of the health-economics literature does not accept the existence of any
causal effect running from income to health, except possibly through the
purchase of health care, arguing that the correlation between them is driven in
part by a causality running from health to income, and in part by third factors,
such as education" (Deaton 2003:47)

"Section 3 turns to the evidence, most of which comes from developed economies."
(Deaton 2003:47)

"broader notions of inequality or unfairness." (Deaton 2003:48)

"More broadly, ideas about income, income inequality, and health are important
for welfare economics." (Deaton 2003:48)

"Redistribution of income from rich to poor, whether within or between
countries, will increase the health of the poor more than it hurts the health of
the rich, and thus improve average national or world health." (Deaton 2003:49)

"Although figure 2 shows no poverty line below which income matters and above
which it does not, it is at the bottom of the income distribution that the
relationship" (Deaton 2003:50)

"between income and health really matters." (Deaton 2003:51)

"Richard Hammond (1950) discusses how wartime food policy in the 1940s not only
protected essential food supplies, but brought fresh milk and vitamins to
working people to the extent that, unlike most of the citizens of Europe, their
nutritional status improved during the war." (Deaton 2003:51)

""statistical artefact"" (Deaton 2003:51)

"Hugh Gravelle 1998" (Deaton 2003:51)

"2.1.2 Does Income Cause Health?" (Deaton 2003:51)

"In private or partially private systems, money can also pay for more expensive
health care, but this mechanism is often discounted, sometimes because of a
general skepticism about the degree to which death can be postponed by medical
care or, more specifically, because of doubts about the relative effectiveness
of expensive over basic health care." (Deaton 2003:52)

"Thomas McKeown (1976, 1979) famously demonstrated that, for disease after
disease, the introduction of effective prophylaxis was not the primary factor
driving historical declines in mortality," (Deaton 2003:52)

"This literature tends to see income as a "marker" for an underlying concept of
socioeconomic status, which is treated as the underlying cause of health
discrepancies." (Deaton 2003:52)

"There are studies that look at the separate effects of both education and
income. In the NLMS (and figure 2) the protective effects of income are not much
affected by controlling for education (Irma Elo and Preston 1996; Deaton and
Christina Paxson 2001a; and E. Backlund et al. 1999), and similar findings have
come from other data sets (Evelyn Kitigawa and Philip Hauser 1973; Paula Lantz
et al. 1998; Richard Rogers, Robert Hummer, and Charles Nam 2000)." (Deaton
2003:53)

"(in the Whitehall studies, which have full medical and behavioral data, only
about a quarter of the association between rank and mortality is eliminated by
controlling for risk factors)" (Deaton 2003:53)

"The most difficult issue of all is sorting out the dual causality between
income and health." (Deaton 2003:53)

"In poor countries, where malnutrition remains a major issue, there is wide
agreement that income has a direct causal effect; for excellent empirical
evidence on the effects of South Africa's generous social pension, see Anne Case
(2001, 2002)." (Deaton 2003:53)

"Even malnutrition may still have effects in rich countries today; Gabriele
Doblhammer and James Vaupel (2001) and Doblhammer (2002) have established a
relationship between month of birth and remaining life-expectancy at age fifty
(Austria, Denmark, Australia) and mean age at death (those who died between 1989
and 1997 in the United States). Those born in October and November do better
than those born in March and April, although the seasonal pattern is reversed in
the southern hemisphere (except for those who died in the south but were born in
the north.) These effects are plausibly attributed to the effects of
intrauterine nutrition more than half a century ago, particularly to the
seasonal availability of fresh fruit and vegetables, and are indeed wearing off
for more recently born cohorts." (Deaton 2003:53)

"The studies of birth cohorts, particularly in Britain, have thrown up a wide
range of dynamic effects between health and earnings, often operating with long
lags. Panel data in Britain (British Household Panel Survey/BHPS) and the United
States (Health and Retirement Survey/HRS) are currently being used to examine
health and income dynamics. For example, in BHPS, Benzeval and Ken Judge (2001)
find that controlling for initial (self-reported) health status reduces but does
not eliminate the effect of current income or current health status. A more
sophisticated approach, closely related to Granger causality testing, is
employed by Peter Adams et al. (2003) using data from HRS; they find no causal
link from wealth to health. This analysis, in particular, and the ability of
"post hoc, propter hoc" inference to capture causality in general, has been
seriously challenged by Fabrizia Mealli and Donald Rubin (2002)" (Deaton
2003:54)

"the absolute income or poverty hypothesis implies that, among the poorest
countries, average income is what matters for population health, and income
inequality is relatively less important." (Deaton 2003:54)

"Among rich countries, average income is less important, and income inequality
relatively more important." (Deaton 2003:54)

"The second point illustrated by (2), due to Douglas Miller (2000), is that the
parameters γ and θ are both identified in the equation so that it is possible,
at least in principle, to test for a direct effect of inequality using only
aggregate data. Intuitively, this works because the curvature in the individual
relationship (1) is transmitted to the aggregate relationship (2), so that it is
possible, using only aggregate data, to eliminate the part of the inequality
effect that works through the aggregation" (Deaton 2003:55)

"Miller applies this technique to mortality differences across the U.S. states,
and finds that the relationship between mortality and income inequality is
entirely explained by the curvature in the aggregate relationship between
average income and mortality, leaving no room for a direct effect of
inequality." (Deaton 2003:55)

"but the contradiction between these two sets of results most likely reflects a
deeper difference in the relationship between income and mortality when
estimated from individual and aggregate data." (Deaton 2003:55)

"A more realistic model links individual health to a latent variable, itself a
function of income, and assumes that death takes place when this latent variable
falls below some critical value" (Deaton 2003:55)

"2.1.4 Relative Income, Absolute Income, and Inequality" (Deaton 2003:56)

"relative income hypothesis." (Deaton 2003:56)

"The local housing case is an example where it is not money itself that is
important, but rank," (Deaton 2003:56)

"Whitehall studies, the degree of control at work accounts for much of the
relationship between occupational status and health (Marmot et al. 1997)."
(Deaton 2003:56)

"but unconditional on reference group income, takes the form: βσ 2w E(h is|yis)=
̄h+ 22ys (11) σ w+σb where σ2w and σ2are the withinand between-group variances
of income. The formula is the same as the attenuation bias formula for
measurement error in regression analysis." (Deaton 2003:59)

"Psychosocial stress is the main pathway through which inequality affects
health. Wilkinson draws a contrast between societies in which relationships "are
structured by low-stress affiliative strategies which foster social solidarity"
on the one hand, and societies characterized by "much more stressful strategies
of dominance, conflict and submission" (Deaton 2003:60)

"2.2 Other Mechanisms, Other Inequalities" (Deaton 2003:61)

"2.2.1 Credit Constraints, Health, and Income Inequality" (Deaton 2003:61)

"Elo and Preston (1996)" (Deaton 2003:61)

"2.2.2 Nutritional Wages, Health, and Inequality of Land" (Deaton 2003:62)

"2.2.3 Public Goods and Political Inequality" (Deaton 2003:64)

"Alberto Alesina" (Deaton 2003:64)

"They point out that the average value of public good to members of a community
diminishes with the heterogeneity of their preferences, a heterogeneity that
could be located in racial, income, or geographical differences." (Deaton
2003:64)

"2.3 Income Inequality as a Consequence of Ill Health" (Deaton 2003:66)

"income causes health" (Deaton 2003:66)

"But health also causes income, and policies that directly affect health are
likely to have effects on income inequality" (Deaton 2003:66)

"3. Empirical Evidence on Inequality and Health" (Deaton 2003:68)

"3.1 Measuring Income Inequality" (Deaton 2003:68)

"There has also been a good deal of discussion about the appropriate definition
of household income, and in particular the treatment of household size. The
standard procedure in economics would be to "equivalize" household income by
dividing income by some measure of household size, either household size itself,
or the number of equivalent adults, for example the number of adults plus half
the number of children" (Deaton 2003:69)

"measurement problems." (Deaton 2003:69)

"Income itself is hard to measure, and the difficulties multiply when measuring
income inequality." (Deaton 2003:69)

"reference periods for income" (Deaton 2003:69)

"degree of disaggregation of income" (Deaton 2003:69)

"cutoff points" (Deaton 2003:69)

"There are also differences across countries in the degree to which people are
prepared to cooperate with government surveys. Response rates in the United
States are typically much higher than in Western Europe." (Deaton 2003:70)

"Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) which contains information on the distributions
of disposable income for 25 (wealthy) countries over a period of twenty years,
although not all countries have data for all years;" (Deaton 2003:70)

"World Bank web site of the inequality data assembled by Klaus Deininger and Lyn
Squire (DS) (1996)." (Deaton 2003:70)

"Most household surveys have a two-stage stratified design in which, at the
first stage, primary sampling units (PSUs) are randomly selected with
probability proportional to population size. These PSUs are typically small
geographical units, such as villages or census tracts. Within each PSU, the same
number of households are selected so that, over the two stages together, each
household in the population has an equal chance of being selected into the
survey. In some studies, investigators have calculated measures of local income
inequality based on the households in each PSU. This procedure is obviously
dangerous when there are only a few households in each PSU and, even when this
is not the case, respondents within PSUs are sometimes not randomly selected, so
that the relationship between the sample estimate and its population counterpart
cannot be assessed. N" (Deaton 2003:71)

"The single most convincing study of the LIS countries is by Judge, Jo-Ann
Mulligan, and Benzeval (1997)" (Deaton 2003:73)

"Figure 6. Income Inequality and Age-Adjusted Mortality, U.S. States, 1990"
(Deaton 2003:76)

"Nevertheless, there are serious questions about whether the correlation between
income inequality and mortality is robust through time, and whether it comes
from the effects of income inequality or some other factor that is correlated
with it." (Deaton 2003:76)

"The inclusion of controls for the average level of education in each state
eliminates the significance of the gini coefficient and, once the authors
include controls for the fractions of people in each state who are urbanized and
who are black, the gini coefficient attracts a negative sign, though one that is
not significantly different from zero" (Deaton 2003:76)

"This result means that the effect of inequality on whites comes, not from the
inequality of white incomes, but from the inequality between whites and blacks,
raising the suspicion that the effect has more to do with race than with income
inequality." (Deaton 2003:77)

"It turns out that a high fraction of blacks raises mortality rates among both
males and females (note that these are whites) and that conditional on race,
income inequality has no effect on mortality" (Deaton 2003:77)

"Another concern is the pooling of data across racial or ethnic groups with
different incomes and different mortality rates. In the United States, African
Americans have higher mortality rates and lower incomes than whites, so that
states with a high fraction of blacks tend to have higher mortality rates as
well as higher income inequality. As can be seen from figure 6, such states tend
to be predominately in the South where many other special factors are likely to
operate; by contrast, the states with low mortality are states where there are
few or no African Americans." (Deaton 2003:77)

"These data can be used to replicate the findings of Lynch et al. (1998), and to
show that, once again, the inclusion of racial composition eliminates (and
sometimes even reverses) the effect of income inequality. And because there are
more MSAs than states, it is possible to work within regions, and to show that
whether we look at cities in the" (Deaton 2003:77)

"These data can be used to replicate the findings of Lynch et al. (1998), and to
show that, once again, the inclusion of racial composition eliminates (and
sometimes even reverses) the effect of income inequality. And because there are
more MSAs than states, it is possible to work within regions, and to show that
whether we look at cities in the" (Deaton 2003:77)

"South, or cities in other regions, and conditioning on city average income,
white mortality is higher in cities where the fraction of blacks is higher"
(Deaton 2003:78)

"South, or cities in other regions, and conditioning on city average income,
white mortality is higher in cities where the fraction of blacks is higher."
(Deaton 2003:78)

"That the fraction black eliminates the effects of income inequality or
mortality is easy enough to understand mechanically; blacks are poorer and
whites richer in cities with a large fraction black, so that income inequality
is higher where the fraction black is higher, but it is the fraction black, not
income inequality, that matters for both white and black mortality." (Deaton
2003:78)

"If the apparent effects of inequality or mortality are nothing to do with
income inequality per se, but are instead tied to race in America, then there
should be no relationship between income inequality and mortality across regions
in countries where race does not have the same salience." (Deaton 2003:78)

"Chiang interprets his findings as support for Wilkinson's idea that income is
important at low levels of income, and income inequality at high levels of
income, which, as we have seen, is also consistent with a nonlinear effect of
income and no direct influence of inequality." (Deaton 2003:79)

"3.4 Studies of Income Inequality and Health Using Individual Data" (Deaton
2003:79)

"They have the advantage of being able to look for a direct effect of income
inequality without having to allow for the effects of inequality that work
through aggregation" (Deaton 2003:79)

"Several studies find a range of results, with at least some studies finding an
effect" (Deaton 2003:81)

"As noted, Wolfson et al. (1999) show that the degree of curvature in the NLMS
(figure 2) is insufficient to explain the large effects of income inequality on
mortality at the state level" (Deaton 2003:81)

"My original concern was to test the model of relative deprivation presented in
section 2.2.5 above" (Deaton 2003:81)

"Once again, there is no direct effect of income inequality. Because the racial
composition of areas is such a strong predictor of mortality in the aggregate
state, MSA, and county-level data, as well as in the individual data from the
NLMS, it would be interesting to discover whether the Lochner et al. (2001)
findings on mortality in the NHIS follow-up can also be attributed to racial
composition; given their partition of states into inequality groups, it seems
likely" (Deaton 2003:82)

"3.5 Inequality and Mortality Decline in the United States and Britain" (Deaton
2003:82)


### 